Revised April 2013                             MAJOR                                      Page 1 of PART IV
                        MAJOR - SEWAGE SLUDGE REQUIREMENTS
                                   INSTRUCTIONS TO PERMITTEES
Select only those Elements and Sections which apply to your sludge reuse or disposal practice.
If your facility utilizes more than one type of disposal or reuse method (for example, Element I and
Element II apply) or the quality of your sludge varies (for example, Section II and Section III of Element
I apply) use a separate Discharge Monitoring Report (DMR) for each Section that is applicable.
The sludge DMRs shall be due by February 19th of each year and shall cover the previous January
through December time period. (The sludge DMRs for permits in Texas shall be due by September 1 of
each year, with the reporting period of August 1 to July 31)
The sludge conditions do not apply to wastewater treatment lagoons where sludge is not wasted
for final reuse/disposal. If the sludge is not removed, the permittee shall indicate on the DMR "No
Discharge".
ELEMENT 1 - LAND APPLICATION
SECTION I:           Page 2 - Requirements Applying to All Sewage Sludge Land Application
SECTION II:          Page 6 - Requirements Specific to Bulk Sewage Sludge for Application to the Land
                     Meeting Class A or B Pathogen Reduction and the Cumulative Loading Rates in
                     Table 2, or Class B Pathogen Reduction and the Pollutant Concentrations in Table 3
SECTION III:         Page 10 - Requirements Specific to Bulk Sewage Sludge Meeting Pollutant
                     Concentrations in Table 3 and Class A Pathogen Reduction Requirements
SECTION IV:           Page 12 - Requirements Specific to Sludge Sold or Given Away in a Bag or Other
                     Container for Application to the Land that does not meet the Pollutant Concentrations
                     in Table 3
ELEMENT 2 - SURFACE DISPOSAL
SECTION I:           Page 14 - Requirements Applying to All Sewage Sludge Surface Disposal
SECTION II:          Page 19 - Requirements Specific to Surface Disposal Sites Without a Liner and
                     Leachate Collection System
SECTION III:         Page 20 - Requirements Specific to Surface Disposal Sites With a Liner and Leachate
                     Collection System
ELEMENT 3 - MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE LANDFILL DISPOSAL
SECTION I:           Page 22 - Requirements Applying to All Municipal Solid Waste Landfill Disposal
                     Activities
Revised April 2013                           MAJOR                                       Page 2 of PART IV
                               ELEMENT 1 - LAND APPLICATION
SECTION I. REQUIREMENTS APPLYING TO ALL SEWAGE SLUDGE LAND APPLICATION
A. General Requirements

   1. The permittee shall handle and dispose of sewage sludge in accordance with Section 405 of the
      Clean Water Act and all other applicable Federal regulations to protect public health and the
      environment from any reasonably anticipated adverse effects due to any toxic pollutants which
      may be present in the sludge.
   2. If requirements for sludge management practices or pollutant criteria become more stringent than
      the sludge pollutant limits or acceptable management practices in this permit, or control a
      pollutant not listed in this permit, this permit may be modified or revoked and reissued to
      conform to the requirements promulgated at Section 405(d)(2) of the Clean Water Act. If new
      limits for Molybdenum are promulgated prior to permit expiration, then those limits shall
      become directly enforceable.
   3. In all cases, if the person (permit holder) who prepares the sewage sludge supplies the sewage
      sludge to another person for land application use or to the owner or lease holder of the land, the
      permit holder shall provide necessary information to the parties who receive the sludge to assure
      compliance with these regulations.
   4. The permittee shall give prior notice to EPA (Chief, Permits Branch, Water Management
      Division, Mail Code 6WQ-P, EPA Region 6, 1445 Ross Avenue, Dallas, Texas 75202) of any
      planned changes in the sewage sludge disposal practice, in accordance with 40 CFR Part
      122.41(l)(1)(iii). These changes may justify the application of permit conditions that are different
      from or absent in the existing permit. Change in the sludge use or disposal practice may because
      for modification of the permit in accordance with 40 CFR Part 122.62(a)(1).

B. Testing Requirements

   1. Sewage sludge shall be tested once during the life of the permit within one year from the
      effective date of the permit in accordance with the method specified at 40 CFR 268, Appendix I
      (Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure (TCLP)) or other approved methods. Sludge shall
      be tested after final treatment prior to leaving the POTW site. Sewage sludge determined to be a
      hazardous waste in accordance with 40 CFR Part 261, shall be handled according to RCRA
      standards for the disposal of hazardous waste in accordance with 40 CFR Part 262. The disposal
      of sewage sludge determined to be a hazardous waste, in other than a certified hazardous waste
      disposal facility shall be prohibited. The Information Management Section, telephone no. (214)
      665-6750, and the appropriate state agency shall be notified of test failure within 24 hours. A
      written rep ort shall be provided to this office within 7 days after failing the TCLP. The report
      will contain test results, certification that unauthorized disposal has not occurred and a summary
      of alternative disposal plans that comply with RCRA standards for the disposal of hazardous
      waste. The report shall be addressed to: Director, Multimedia Planning and Permitting Division,
      EPA Region 6, Mail Code 6PD, 144 5 Ross Avenue, Dallas, Texas 75202. A copy of this report
      shall be sent to the Chief, Water Enforcement Branch, Compliance Assurance and Enforcement
      Division, Mail Code 6 EN-W , at the same street address.

   2. Sewage sludge shall not be applied to the land if the concentration of the pollutants exceeds the
      pollutant concentration criteria in Table 1. The frequency of testing for pollutants in Table 1 is
      found in Element 1, Section I.C.
Revised April 2013                           MAJOR                                       Page 3 of PART IV
       Table 1
         Pollutant                     Ceiling Concentration
                                       (milligrams per kilogram)*
        Arsenic                                       75
        Cadmium                                       85
        Copper                                       4300
        Lead                                         840
        Mercury                                       57
        Molybdenum                                    75
        Nickel                                       420
        PCBs                                          49
        Selenium                                     100
        Zinc                                         7500
       * Dry weight basis

   3. Pathogen Control

       All sewage sludge that is applied to agricultural land, forest, a public contact site, or a
       reclamation site shall be treated by either the Class A or Class B pathogen requirements. Sewage
       sludge that is applied to a lawn or home garden shall be treated by the Class A pathogen
       requirements. Sewage sludge that is sold or given away in a bag shall be treated by Class A
       pathogen requirements.

       a. Six alternatives are available to demonstrate compliance with Class A sewage sludge. All 6
          options require either the density of fecal coliform in the sewage sludge be less than 1000
          Most Probable Number (MPN) per gram of total solids (dry weight basis), or the density of
          Salmonella sp. bacteria in the sewage sludge be less than three MPN per four grams of total
          solids (dry weight basis) at the time the sewage sludge is used or disposed; at the time the
          sewage sludge is prepared for sale or given away in a bag or other container for application
          to the land. Below are the additional requirements necessary to meet the definition of a Class
          A sludge. Alternatives 5 and 6 are not authorized to demonstrate compliance with Class A
          sewage sludge in Texas permits.
           Alternative 1 - The temperature of the sewage sludge that is used or disposed shall be
           maintained at a specific value for a period of time. See 503.32(a)(3)(ii) for specific
           information.
           Alternative 2 - The pH of the sewage sludge that is used or disposed shall be raised to above
           12 and shall remain above 12 for 72 hours. The pH shall be defined as the logarithm of the
           reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration measured at 25 degrees Celsius or measured at
           another temperature and then converted to an equivalent value at 25 degrees Celsius.
           The temperature of the sewage sludge shall be above 52 degrees Celsius for 12 hours or
           longer during the period that the pH of the sewage sludge is above 12.
           At the end of the 72 hour period during which the pH of the sewage sludge is above 12, the
           sewage sludge shall be air dried to achieve a percent solids in the sewage sludge greater than
           50%.
           Alternative 3 - The sewage sludge shall be analyzed for enteric viruses prior to pathogen
           treatment. The limit for enteric viruses is one Plaque-forming Unit per four grams of total
           solids (dry weight basis) either before or following pathogen treatment. See 503.32(a)(5)(ii)
           for specific information. The sewage sludge shall be analyzed for viable helminth ova prior
Revised April 2013                            MAJOR                                        Page 4 of PART IV
           to pathogen treatment. The limit for viable helminth ova is less than one per four grams of
           total solids (dry weight basis) either before or following pathogen treatment. See
           503.32(a)(5)(iii) for specific information.
           Alternative 4 - The density of enteric viruses in the sewage sludge shall be less than one
           Plaque- forming Unit per four grams of total solids (dry weight basis) at the time the sewage
           sludge is used or disposed or at the time the sludge is prepared for sale or give away in a bag
           or other container for application to the land.
           The density of viable helminth ova in the sewage sludge shall be less than one per four grams
           of total solids (dry weigh t basis) at the time the sewage sludge is used or dispose d or at the
           time the sewage sludge is prepared for sale or give away in a bag or other container for
           application to the land.
           Alternative 5 - Sewage sludge shall be treated by one of the Processes to Further Reduce
           Pathogens (PFRP) described in 503 Appendix B. PFRPs include composting, heat drying,
           heat treatment, and thermophilic aerobic digestion.
           Alternative 6 - Sewage sludge shall be treated by a process that is equivalent to a Process to
           Further Reduce Pathogens, if individually approved by the Pathogen Equivalency Committee
           representing the EPA.
       b. Three alternatives are available to demonstrate compliance with Class B sewage sludge.
          Alternatives 2 and 3 are not authorized to demonstrate compliance with Class B sewage
          sludge in Texas permits.
           Alternative 1 - Seven random samples of the sewage sludge shall be collected for one
           monitoring episode at the time the sewage sludge is used or disposed.
           The geometric mean of the density of fecal coliform in the samples collected shall be less
           than either 2,000,000 MPN per gram of total solids (dry weight basis) or 2,000,000 Colony
           Forming Units per gram of total solids (dry weight basis).
           Alternative 2 - Sewage sludge shall be treated in one of the Processes to significantly Reduce
           Pathogens described in 503 Appendix B.
           Alternative 3 - Sewage sludge shall be treated in a process that is equivalent to a PSRP, if
           individually approved by the Pathogen Equivalency Committee representing the EPA.
           In addition, the following site restrictions must be met if Class B sludge is land applied:

          Food crops with harvested parts that touch the sewage sludge /soil mixture and are totally
           above the land surface shall not be harvested for 14 months after application of sewage
           sludge.
          Food crops with harvested parts below the surface of the land shall not be harvested for 20
           months after application of sewage sludge when the sewage sludge remains on the land
           surface for 4 months or longer prior to incorporation into the soil.
          Food crops with harvested parts below the surface of the land shall not be harvested for 38
           months after application of sewage sludge when the sewage sludge remains on the land
           surface for less than 4 months prior to incorporation into the soil.
          Food crops, feed crops, and fiber crops shall not be harvested for 30 days after application of
           sewage sludge.
Revised April 2013                            MAJOR                                        Page 5 of PART IV
          Animals shall not be allowed to graze on the land for 30 days after application of sewage
           sludge.
          Turf grown on land where sewage sludge is applied shall not be harvested for 1 year after
           application of the sewage sludge when the harvested turf is placed on either land with a high
           potential for public exposure or a lawn, unless otherwise specified by the permitting
           authority.
          Public access to land with a high potential for public exposure shall be restricted for 1 year
           after application of sewage sludge.
          Public access to land with a low potential for public exposure shall be restricted for 30 days
           after application of sewage sludge.

   4. Vector Attraction Reduction Requirements
       All bulk sewage sludge that is applied to agricultural land, forest, a public contact site, or a
       reclamation site shall be treated by one of the following alternatives 1 through 10 for Vector
       Attraction Reduction. If bulk sewage sludge is applied to a home garden, or bagged sewage
       sludge is applied to the land, only alternative 1 through alternative 8 shall be used.
       Alternative 1 - The mass of volatile solids in the sewage sludge shall be reduced by a minimum
       of 38%.
       Alternative 2 - If Alternative 1 cannot be met for an anaerobically digested sludge, demonstration
       can be made by digesting a portion of the previously digested sludge anaerobically in the
       laboratory in a bench-scale unit for 40 additional days at a temperature between 30 and 37
       degrees Celsius. Volatile solids must be reduced by less than 17% to demonstrate compliance.
       Alternative 3 - If Alternative 1 cannot be met for an aerobically digested sludge, demonstration
       can be made by digesting a portion of the previously digested sludge with a percent solid of 2%
       or less aerobically in the laboratory in a bench-scale unit for 30 additional days at 20 degrees
       Celsius. Volatile solids must be reduced by less than 15% to demonstrate compliance.
       Alternative 4 - The specific oxygen uptake rate (SOUR) for sewage sludge treated in an aerobic
       process shall be equal to or less than 1.5 milligrams of oxygen per hour per gram of total solids
       (dry weight basis) at a temperature of 20 degrees Celsius.
       Alternative 5 - Sewage sludge shall be treated in an aerobic process for 14 days or longer. During
       that time, the temperature of the sewage sludge shall be higher than 40 degrees Celsius and the
       average temperature of the sewage sludge shall be higher than 45 degrees Celsius.
       Alternative 6 - The pH of sewage sludge shall be raised to 12 or higher by alkali addition and,
       without the addition of more alkali shall remain at 12 or higher for two hours and then at 11.5 or
       higher for an additional 22 hours at the time the sewage sludge is used or disposed; at the time
       the sewage sludge is prepared for sale or given away in a bag or other container.
       Alternative 7 - The percent solids of sewage sludge that does not contain unstabilized solids
       generated in a primary wastewater treatment process shall be equal to or greater than 75 % based
       on the moisture content and total solids prior to mixing with other materials. Unstabilized solids
       are defined as organic materials in sewage sludge that have not been treated in either an aerobic
       or anaerobic treatment process.
Revised April 2013                                 MAJOR                                              Page 6 of PART IV
       Alternative 8 - The percent solids of sewage sludge that contains unstabilized solids generated in
       a primary wastewater treatment process shall be equal to or greater than 90% based on the
       moisture content and total solids prior to mixing with other materials. Unstabilized solids are
       defined as organic materials in sewage sludge that have not been treated in either an aerobic or
       anaerobic treatment process.
       Alternative 9 -

          Sewage sludge shall be injected below the surface of the land.
          No significant amount of the sewage sludge shall be present on the land surface within one
           hour after the sewage sludge is injected.
          When sewage sludge that is injected below the surface of the land is Class A with respect to
           pathogens, the sewage sludge shall be injected below the land surface within eight hours after
           being discharged from the pathogen treatment process.
       Alternative 10 -

          Sewage sludge applied to the land surface or placed on a surface disposal site shall be
           incorporated into the soil within six hours after application to or placement on the land.
          When sewage sludge that is incorporated into the soil is Class A with respect to pathogens,
           the sewage sludge shall be applied to or placed on the land within eight hours after being
           discharged from the pathogen treatment process.

C. Monitoring Requirements
   Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure (TCLP) Test - Once/Permit Life, performed within one
   year from the effective date of the permit
   PCBs         -        Once/Year
   All other pollutants shall be monitored at the frequency shown below:
    Amount of sewage sludge (metric tons per               Frequency
    365 day period)*
    0 ≤ Sludge < 290                                       Once/Year
    290 ≤ Sludge < 1,500                                   Once/Quarter
    1,500 ≤ Sludge < 15,000                                Once/Two Months
    15,000 ≤ Sludge                                        Once/Month
   *Either the amount of bulk sewage sludge applied to the land or the amount of sewage sludge received by a person who
   prepares sewage sludge that is sold or given away in a bag or other container for application to the land (dry weight
   basis).

   Representative samples of sewage sludge shall be collected and analyzed in accordance with the
   methods referenced in 40 CFR 503.8(b).

SECTION II. REQUIREMENTS SPECIFIC TO BULK SEWAGE SLUDGE FOR APPLICATION TO
THE LAND MEETING CLASS A or B PATHOGEN REDUCTION AND THE CUMULATIVE
LOADING RATES IN TABLE 2, OR CLASS B PATHOGEN REDUCTION AND THE
POLLUTANT CONCENTRATIONS IN TABLE 3
For those permittees meeting Class A or B pathogen reduction requirements and that meet the
cumulative loading rates in Table 2 below, or the Class B pathogen reduction requirements and contain
Revised April 2013                            MAJOR                                       Page 7 of PART IV
concentrations of pollutants below those listed in Table 3 found in Element I, Section III, the following
conditions apply:
   1. Pollutant Limits
       Table 2
         Pollutant               Cumulative Pollutant Loading Rate
                                 (kilograms per hectare)
         Arsenic                                          41
         Cadmium                                          39
         Copper                                          1500
         Lead                                            300
         Mercury                                          17
         Molybdenum                                    Report
         Nickel                                          420
         Selenium                                         100
         Zinc                                            2800

   2. Pathogen Control

       All bulk sewage sludge that is applied to agricultural land, forest, a public contact site, a
       reclamation site, or lawn or home garden shall be treated by either Class A or Class B pathogen
       reduction requirements as defined above in Element 1, Section I.B.3.

   3. Management Practices

       a. Bulk sewage sludge shall not be applied to agricultural land, forest, a public contact site, or a
          reclamation site that is flooded, frozen, or snow-covered so that the bulk sewage sludge
          enters a wetland or other waters of the U.S., as defined in 40 CFR 122.2, except as provided
          in a permit issued pursuant to section 404 of the CWA.
       b. Bulk sewage sludge shall not be applied within 10 meters of a water of the U.S.
       c. Bulk sewage sludge shall be applied at or below the agronomic rate in accordance with
          recommendations from the following references:

              STANDARDS 1992 , Standards, Engineering Practices and Data, 39th Edition (1992)
               American Society of Agricultural Engineers, 2950 Niles Road, St. Joseph, MI 49085-
               9659.
              National Engineering Handbook Part 651, Agricultural Waste Management Field
               Handbook (1992), P.O. Box 2890, Washington, D.C. 20013.
              Recommendations of local extension services or Soil Conservation Services.
              Recommendations of a major University's Agronomic Department.

       d. An information sheet shall be provided to the person who receives bulk sewage sludge sold
          or given away. The information sheet shall contain the following information:

              The name and address of the person who prepared the sewage sludge that is sold or given
               away in a bag or other container for application to the land.
              A statement that application of the sewage sludge to the land is prohibited except in
               accordance with the instructions on the label or information sheet.
Revised April 2013                            MAJOR                                        Page 8 of PART IV
              The annual whole sludge application rate for the sewage sludge that does not cause any
               of the cumulative pollutant loading rates in Table 2 above to be exceeded, unless the
               pollutant concentrations in Table 3 found in Element I, Section III below are met.

   4. Notification requirements

       a. If bulk sewage sludge is applied to land in a State other than the State in which the sludge is
          prepared, written notice shall be provided prior to the initial land application to the
          permitting authority for the State in which the bulk sewage sludge is proposed to be applied.
          The notice shall include:

              The location, by either street address or latitude and longitude, of each land application
               site.
              The approximate time period bulk sewage sludge will be applied to the site.
              The name, address, telephone number, and National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
               System permit number (if appropriate) for the person who prepares the bulk sewage
               sludge.
              The name, address, telephone number, and National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
               System permit number (if appropriate) for the person who will apply the bulk sewage
               sludge.

       b. The permittee shall give 60 days prior notice to the Director of any change planned in the
          sewage sludge practice. Any change shall include any planned physical alterations or
          additions to the permitted treatment works, changes in the permittee's sludge use or disposal
          practice, and also alterations, additions, or deletions of disposal sites. These changes may
          justify the application of permit conditions that are different from or absent in the existing
          permit, including notification of additional disposal sites not reported during the permit
          application process or absent in the existing permit. Change in the sludge use or disposal
          practice may because for modification of the permit in accordance with 40 CFR 122.62(a)(1).
       c. The permittee shall provide the location of all existing sludge disposal/use sites to the State
          Historical Commission within 90 days of the effective date of this permit. In addition, the
          permittee shall provide the location of any new disposal/use site to the State Historical
          Commission prior to use of the site.
       d. The permittee shall within 30 days after notification by the State Historical Commission that
          a specific sludge disposal/use area will adversely affect a National Historic Site, cease use of
          such area.

   5. Recordkeeping Requirements - The sludge documents will be retained on site at the same
      location as other NPDES records.
       The person who prepares bulk sewage sludge or a sewage sludge material shall develop the
       following information and shall retain the information for five years. If the permittee supplies the
       sludge to another person who land applies the sludge, the permittee shall notify the land applier
       of the requirements for recordkeeping found in 40 CFR 503.17 for persons who land apply.
       a. The concentration (mg/Kg) in the sludge of each pollutant listed in Table 3 found in Element
          I, Section III and the applicable pollutant concentration criteria (mg/Kg), or the applicable
          cumulative pollutant loading rate and the applicable cumulative pollutant loading rate limit
          (kg/ha) listed in Table 2 above.
Revised April 2013                           MAJOR                                        Page 9 of PART IV
       b. A description of how the pathogen reduction requirements are met (including site restrictions
          for Class B sludge, if applicable).
       c. A description of how the vector attraction reduction requirements are met.
       d. A description of how the management practices listed above in Section II.3 are being met.
       e. The recommended agronomic loading rate from the references listed in Section II.3.c. above,
          as well as the actual agronomic loading rate shall be retained.
       f. A description of how the site restrictions in 40 CFR Part 503.32(b)(5) are met for each site on
          which Class B bulk sewage sludge is applied.
       g. The following certification statement:
          "I certify, under penalty of law, that the management practices in §503.14 have been met for
          each site on which bulk sewage sludge is applied. This determination has been made under
          my direction and supervision in accordance with the system designed to ensure that qualified
          personnel properly gather and evaluate the information used to determine that the
          management practices have been met. I am aware that there are significant penalties for false
          certification including fine and imprisonment."
       h. A certification statement that all applicable requirements (specifically listed) have been met,
          and that the permittee understands that there are significant penalties for false certification
          including fine and imprisonment. See 40 CFR 503.17(a)(4)(i)(B) or 40 CFR Part
          503.17(a)(5)(i)(B) as applicable to the permittees sludge treatment activities.
       i. The permittee shall maintain information that describes future geographical areas where
          sludge may be land applied.
       j. The permittee shall maintain information identifying site selection criteria regarding land
          application sites not identified at the time of permit application submission.
       k. The permittee shall maintain information regarding how future land application sites will be
          managed.
       The person who prepares bulk sewage sludge or a sewage sludge material shall develop the
       following information and shall retain the information indefinitely. If the permittee supplies the
       sludge to another person who land applies the sludge, the permittee shall notify the land applier
       of the requirements for recordkeeping found i n 40 CFR 503 .17 for persons who land apply.
       a. The location, by either street address or latitude and longitude, of each site on which sludge
          is applied.
       b. The number of hectares in each site on which bulk sludge is applied.
       c. The date and time sludge is applied to each site.
       d. The cumulative amount of each pollutant in kilograms/hectare listed in Table 2 applied to
          each site.
       e. The total amount of sludge applied to each site in metric tons.
       f. The following certification statement:
            "I certify, under penalty of law, that the requirements to obtain information in §503.12(e)(2)
            have been met for each site on which bulk sewage sludge is applied. This determination has
            been made under my direction and supervision in accordance with the system designed to
            ensure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information used to
            determine that the requirements to obtain information have been met. I am aware that there
            are significant penalties for false certification including fine and imprisonment."
       g. A description of how the requirements to obtain information in §503.12(e)(2) are met.
Revised April 2013                             MAJOR                                        Page 10 of PART IV
   6. Reporting Requirements - The permittee shall report annually on the DMR the following
      information:

       a.   Pollutant Table (2 or 3) appropriate for permittee's land app lication practices.
       b.   The frequency of monitoring listed in Element 1, Section I.C. which applies to the permittee.
       c.   Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure (TCLP) results (Pass/Fail).
       d.   The concentration (mg/Kg) in the sludge of each pollutant listed in Table 1 (defined as a
            monthly average) as well as the applicable pollutant concentration criteria (mg/K g) listed in
            Table 3 found in Element 1, Section III, or the applicable pollutant loading rate limit (kg/ha)
            listed in Table 2 above if it exceeds 90% of the limit.
       e.   Level of pathogen reduction achieved (C lass A or Class B).
       f.   Alternative used as listed in Section I.B.3.(a. or b.). Alternatives describe how the pathogen
            reduction requirements are met. If Class B sludge, include information on how site
            restrictions were met in the DMR comment section or attach a separate sheet to the DMR.
       g.   Vector attraction reduction alternative used as listed in Section I.B.4. h.
       h.   Annual sludge production in dry metric tons/year.
       i.   Amount of sludge land applied in dry metric tons/year.
       j.   Amount of sludge transported interstate in dry metric tons/year.
       k.   The certification statement listed in 503.17(a)(4)(i)(B) or 503.17(a)(5)(i)(B) whichever
            applies to the permittees sludge treatment activities shall be attached to the DMR.
       l.   When the amount of any pollutant applied to the land exceeds 90% of the cumulative
            pollutant loading rate for that pollutant, as described in Table 2, the permittee shall report the
            following information as an attachment to the DMR.

               The location, by either street address or latitude and longitude.
               The number of hectares in each site on which bulk sewage sludge is applied.
               The date and time bulk sewage sludge is applied to each site.
               The cumulative amount of each pollutant (i.e., kilograms/hectare) listed in Table 2 in the
                bulk sewage sludge applied to each site.
               The amount of sewage sludge (i.e., metric tons) applied to each site.
               The following c certification statement:
               "I certify, under penalty of law, that the information that will be used to determine
                compliance with the requirements to obtain information in 40 CFR 503.12(e)(2) have
                been met for each site on which bulk sewage sludge is applied. This determination has
                been made under my direction and supervision in accordance with the system designed to
                ensure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information used to
                determine that the requirements to obtain information have been met. I am aware that
                there are significant penalties for false certification including fine and imprisonment."
               A description of how the requirements to obtain information in 40 CFR 503.12(e)(2) are
                met.
SECTION III. REQUIREMENTS SPECIFIC TO BULK OR BAGGED SEWAGE SLUDGE
MEETING POLLUTANT CONCENTRATIONS IN TABLE 3 AND CLASS A PATHOGEN
REDUCTION REQUIREMENTS
For those permittees with sludge that contains concentrations of pollutants below those pollutant limits
listed in Table 3 for bulk or bagged (containerized) sewage sludge and also meet the Class A pathogen
reduction requirements, the following conditions apply (Note: All bagged sewage sludge must be treated
by Class A pathogen reduction requirements.):
Revised April 2013                              MAJOR                                     Page 11 of PART IV
   1. Pollutant limits - The concentration of the pollutants in the municipal sewage sludge is at or
      below the values listed.
       Table 3
            Pollutant                     Monthly Average Concentration
                                          (milligrams per kilogram)*
         Arsenic                                             41
         Cadmium                                             39
         Copper                                            1500
         Lead                                               300
         Mercury                                             17
         Molybdenum                                       Report
         Nickel                                             420
         Selenium                                            36
         Zinc                                              2800
       * Dry weight basis

   2. Pathogen Control
       All bulk sewage sludge that is applied to agricultural land, forest, a public contact site, a
       reclamation site, or lawn or home garden shall be treated by the Class A pathogen reduction
       requirements as defined above in Element I, Section I.B.3. All bagged sewage sludge must be
       treated by Class A pathogen reduction requirements.
   3. Management Practices - None.

   4. Notification Requirements - None.

   5. Recordkeeping Requirements - The permittee shall develop the following information and shall
      retain the information for five years. The sludge documents will be retained on site at the same
      location as other NPDES records.

       a. The concentration (mg/Kg) in the sludge of each pollutant listed in Table 3 and the
          applicable pollutant concentration criteria listed in Table 3.
       b. A certification statement that all applicable requirements (specifically listed) have been met,
          and that the permittee understands that there are significant penalties for false certification
          including fine and imprisonment. See 503.17(a)(1)(ii) or 503.17(a)(3)(i)(B), whichever
          applies to the permittees sludge treatment activities.
       c. A description of how the Class A pathogen reduction requirements are met.
       d. A description of how the vector attraction reduction requirements are met.

   6. Reporting Requirements - The permittee shall report annually on the DMR the following
      information:

       a.     Pollutant Table 3 appropriate for permittee's land application practices.
       b.     The frequency of monitoring listed in Element 1, Section I.C. which applies to the permittee.
       c.     Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure (TCLP) results. (Pass/Fail).
       d.     The concentration (mg/Kg) in the sludge of each pollutant listed in Table 1 (defined as a
              monthly average) found in Element 1, Section I. In addition, the applicable pollutant
              concentration criteria listed in Table 3 should be included on the DMR.
Revised April 2013                            MAJOR                                      Page 12 of PART IV
       e. Pathogen reduction Alternative used for Class A bagged or bulk sludge as listed in Section
          I.B.3.a.
       f. Vector attraction reduction Alternative used as listed in Section I.B.4.
       g. Annual sludge production in dry metric tons/year.
       h. Amount of sludge land applied in dry metric tons/year.
       i. Amount of sludge transported interstate in dry metric tons/year.
       j. The certification statement listed in 503.17(a)(1)(ii) or 503.17(a)(3)(i)(B), whichever applies
          to the permittees sludge treatment activities, shall be attached to the DMR.
SECTION IV. REQUIREMENTS SPECIFIC TO SLUDGE SOLD OR GIVEN AWAY IN A BAG OR
OTHER CONTAINER FOR APPLICATION TO THE LAND THAT DOES NOT MEET THE
MINIMUM POLLUTANT CONCENTRATIONS
   1. Pollutant Limits
       Table 4
         Pollutant               Annual Pollutant Loading Rate (kilograms per
                                 hectare per 365 day period)
         Arsenic                                           2
         Cadmium                                          1.9
         Copper                                           75
         Lead                                             15
         Mercury                                         0.85
         Molybdenum                                    Report
         Nickel                                           21
         Selenium                                          5
         Zinc                                            140

   2. Pathogen Control

       All sewage sludge that is sold or given a way in a bag or other container for application to the
       land shall be treated by the Class A pathogen requirements as defined above in Section I.B.3.a.
       above.
   3. Management Practices
       Either a label shall be affixed to the bag or other container in which sewage sludge that is sold or
       given a way for application to the land, or an information sheet shall be provided to the person
       who receives sewage sludge sold or given away in another container for application to the land.
       The label or information sheet shall contain the following information:
       a. The name and address of the person who prepared the sewage sludge that is sold or given
          away in a bag or other container for application to the land.
       b. A statement that application of the sewage sludge to the land is prohibited except in
          accordance with the instructions on the label or information sheet.
       c. The annual whole sludge application rate for the sewage sludge that will not cause any of the
          annual pollutant loading rates in Table 4 above to be exceeded.

   4. Notification Requirements - None.
Revised April 2013                            MAJOR                                     Page 13 of PART IV
   5. Recordkeeping Requirements - The sludge documents will be retained on site at the same
      location as other NPD ES records. The person who prepares sewage sludge or a sewage sludge
      material shall develop the following information and shall retain the information for five years.

            a. The concentration in the sludge of each pollutant listed above in found in Element I,
               Section I, Table 1.
            b. The following certification statement found in §503.17(a)(6)(iii).
               "I certify, under penalty of law, that the information that will be used to determine
               compliance with the management practices in §503.14(e), the Class A pathogen
               requirement in §503.32(a), and the vector attraction reduction requirement in (insert
               vector attraction reduction option) have been met. This determination has been made
               under my direction and supervision in accordance with the system designed to ensure that
               qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information used to determine that
               the management practices, pathogen requirements, and vector attraction reduction
               requirements have been met. I am aware that there are significant penalties for false
               certification including the possibility of fine and imprisonment".
            c. A description of how the Class A pathogen reduction requirements are met.
            d. A description of how the vector attraction reduction requirements are met.
            e. The annual whole sludge application rate for the sewage sludge that does not cause the
               annual pollutant loading rates in Table 4 to be exceeded. See Appendix A to Part 503 -
               Procedure to Determine the Annual Whole Sludge Application Rate for Sewage Sludge.

   6. Reporting Requirements - The permittee shall report annually on the DMR the following
      information:

       a.   List Pollutant Table 4 appropriate for permittee's land application practices.
       b.   The frequency of monitoring listed in Element 1, Section I.C. which applies to the permittee.
       c.   Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure (TCLP) results. (Pass/Fail).
       d.   The concentration (mg/Kg) in the sludge of each pollutant listed in Table 1 (defined as a
            monthly average) found in Element 1, Section I.
       e.   Class A pathogen reduction Alternative used as listed in Section I.B.3.a. Alternatives
            describe how the pathogen reduction requirements are met.
       f.   Vector attraction reduction Alternative used as listed in Section I.B.4.
       g.   Annual sludge production in dry metric tons/year.
       h.   Amount of sludge land applied in dry metric tons/year.
       i.   Amount of sludge transported interstate in dry metric tons/year.
       j.   The following certification statement found in § 503.17(a)(6)(iii) shall be attached to the
            DMR.
            "I certify, under penalty of law, that the information that will be used to determine
            compliance with the management practices in §503.14(e), the Class A pathogen requirement
            in §503.32(a), and the vector attraction reduction requirement in (insert vector attraction
            reduction option) have been met. This determination has been made under my direction and
            supervision in accordance with the system designed to ensure that qualified personnel
            properly gather and evaluate the information used to determine that the management
            practices, pathogen requirements, and vector attraction reduction requirements have been
            met. I am aware that there are significant penalties for false certification including the
            possibility of fine and imprisonment".
Revised April 2013                           MAJOR                                      Page 14 of PART IV
                               ELEMENT 2- SURFACE DISPOSAL
SECTION I. REQUIREMENTS APPLYING TO ALL SEWAGE SLUDGE SURFACE DISPOSAL
A. General Requirements

   1. The permittee shall handle and dispose of sewage sludge in accordance with Section 405 of the
      Clean Water Act and all other applicable Federal regulations to protect public health and the
      environment from any reasonably anticipated adverse effects due to any toxic pollutants which
      may be present.
   2. If requirements for sludge management practices or pollutant criteria become more stringent than
      the sludge pollutant limits or acceptable management practices in this permit, or control a
      pollutant not listed in this permit, this permit may be modified or revoked and reissued to
      conform to the requirements promulgated at Section 405(d)( 2) of the Clean Water Act.
   3. In all cases, if the person (permit holder) who prepares the sewage sludge or supplies the sewage
      sludge to another person (owner or operator of a sewage sludge unit) for disposal in a surface
      disposal site, the permit holder shall provide all necessary information to the parties who receive
      the sludge to assure compliance with these regulations.
   4. The permittee shall give prior notice to EPA (Chief, Permits Branch, Water Management
      Division, Mail Code 6WQ -P, EPA Region 6, 1445 Ross Avenue, Dallas, Texas 75202) of any
      planned changes in the sewage sludge disposal practice, in accordance with 40 CFR Part
      122.41(l)(1)(iii). These changes may justify the application of permit conditions that are different
      from or absent in the existing permit. Change in the sludge use or disposal practice may because
      for modification of the permit in accordance with 40 CFR Part 122.62(a)(1).
   5. The permittee or owner/operator shall submit a written closure and post closure plan to the
      permitting authority 180 days prior to the closure date. The plan shall include the following
      information:

       a. A discussion of how the leachate collection system will be operated and maintained for three
          years after the surface disposal site closes if it has a liner and leachate collection system.
       b. A description of the system used to monitor continuously for methane gas in the air in any
          structures within the surface disposal site. The methane gas concentration shall not exceed
          25% of the lower explosive limit for methane gas for three years after the sewage sludge unit
          closes. A description of the system used to monitor for methane gas in the air at the property
          line of the site shall be included. The methane gas concentration at the surface disposal site
          property line shall not exceed the lower explosive limit for methane gas for three years after
          the sewage sludge unit closes.
       c. A discussion of how public access to the surface disposal site will be restricted for three
          years after it closes.

B. Management Practices

   1. An active sewage sludge unit located within 60 meters of a fault that has displacement in
      Holocene time shall close by March 22, 1994.
   2. An active sewage sludge unit located in an unstable area shall close by March 22, 1994.
   3. An active sewage sludge unit located in a wetland shall close by March 22, 1994.
   4. Surface disposal shall not restrict the flow of the base 100-year flood.
   5. The run-off collection system for an active sewage sludge unit shall have the capacity to handle
      run-off from a 25-year, 24-hour storm event.
   6. A food crop, feed crop, or a fiber crop shall not be grown on a surface disposal site.
Revised April 2013                            MAJOR                                       Page 15 of PART IV
   7. Animals shall not be grazed on a surface disposal site.
   8. Public access shall be restricted on the active surface disposal site and for three years after the
      site closes.
   9. Placement of sewage sludge shall not contaminate an aquifer. This shall be demonstrated through
      one of the following:

       a. Results of a ground-water monitoring program developed by a qualified ground-water
          scientist.
       b. A certification by a qualified ground-water scientist may be used to demonstrate that sewage
          sludge placed on an active sewage sludge unit does not contaminate an aquifer.

   10. When a cover is placed on an active surface disposal site, the concentration of methane gas in air
       in any structure within the surface disposal site shall not exceed 25% of the lower explosive limit
       for methane gas during the period that the sewage sludge unit is active. The concentration of
       methane gas in air at the property line of the surface disposal site shall not exceed the lower
       explosive limit for methane gas during the period that the sewage sludge unit is active.
       Monitoring shall be continuous.

C. Testing Requirements

   1. Sewage sludge shall be tested once during the life of the permit within one year from the
      effective date of the permit in accordance with the method specified at 40 CFR 268, Appendix I
      (Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure (TCLP)) or other approved methods. Sludge shall
      be tested after final treatment prior to leaving the POTW site. Sewage sludge determined to be a
      hazardous waste in accordance with 40 CFR Part 261, shall be handled according to RCRA
      standards for the disposal of hazardous waste in accordance with 40 CFR Part262. The disposal
      of sewage sludge determined to be a hazardous waste, in other than a certified hazardous waste
      disposal facility shall be prohibited. The Information Management Section, telephone no. (214)
      665-6750, and the appropriate state agency shall be notified of test failure within 24 hours. A
      written report shall be provided to this office within 7 days after failing the TCLP. The report
      will contain test results, certification that unauthorized disposal has not occurred and a summary
      of alternative disposal plans that comply with RCRA standards for the disposal of hazardous
      waste. The report shall be addressed to: Director, Multimedia Planning and Permitting Division,
      EPA Region 6, Mail Code 6PD, 144 5 Ross Avenue, Dallas, Texas 75202. A copy of this report
      shall be sent to the Chief, Water Enforcement Branch, Compliance Assurance and Enforcement
      Division, Mail Code 6 EN-W, at the same street address.
   2. Sewage sludge shall be tested at the frequency show below in Element 2, Section I.D. for PCBs.
      Any sludge exceeding a concentration of 50 mg/Kg shall not be surface disposed.
   3. Pathogen Control
       All sewage sludge that is disposed of in a surface disposal site shall be treated by either the Class
       A or Class B pathogen requirements unless sewage sludge is placed on an active surface disposal
       site, and is covered with soil or other material at the end of each operating day. When reporting
       on the DMR, list pathogen reduction level attained as A, B, or C (daily cover). When reporting
       how compliance was met, list Alternative 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 or 6 for Class A, or Alternative Number 1,
       2, 3, or 4 for Class B, on DMR.
       a. Six alternatives are available to demonstrate compliance with Class A sewage sludge. All 6
          alternatives require either the density of fecal coliform in the sewage sludge be less than
          1000 MPN per gram of total solids (dry weight basis), or the density of Salmonella sp.
Revised April 2013                            MAJOR                                      Page 16 of PART IV
           bacteria in the sewage sludge be less than three Most Probable Number per four grams of
           total solids (dry weight basis) at the time the sewage sludge is used or disposed; at the time
           the sewage sludge is prepared for sale or given away in a bag or other container for
           application to the land. Below are the additional requirements necessary to meet the
           definition of a Class A sludge. Alternatives 5 and 6 are not authorized to demonstrate
           compliance with Class A sewage sludge in Texas permits.
           Alternative 1 - The temperature of the sewage sludge that is used or disposed shall be
           maintained at a specific value for a period of time. See 503.32(a)(3)(ii) for specific
           information. This alternative is not applicable to composting.
           Alternative 2 - The pH of the sewage sludge that is used or disposed shall be raised to above
           12 and shall remain above 12 for 72 hours. The pH shall be defined as the logarithm of the
           reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration measured at 25 degrees Celsius or measured at
           another temperature and then converted to an equivalent value at 25 degrees Celsius.
           The temperature of the sewage sludge shall be above 52 degrees Celsius for 12 hours or
           longer during the period that the pH of the sewage sludge is above 12.
           At the end of the 72 hour period during which the pH of the sewage sludge is above 12, the
           sewage sludge shall be air dried to achieve a percent solids in the sewage sludge greater than
           50%.
           Alternative 3 - The sewage sludge shall be analyzed for enteric viruses prior to pathogen
           treatment. The limit for enteric viruses is one Plaque-forming Unit per four grams of total
           solids (dry weight basis) either before or following pathogen treatment. See 503.32(a)(5)(ii)
           for specific information. The sewage sludge shall be analyzed for viable helminth ova prior
           to pathogen treatment. The limit for viable helminth ova is less than one per four grams of
           total solids (dry weight basis) either before or following pathogen treatment. See
           503.32(a)(5)(iii) for specific information.
           Alternative 4 - The density of enteric viruses in the sewage sludge shall be less than one
           Plaque- forming Unit per four grams of total solids (dry weight bas is) at the time the sewage
           sludge is used or disposed or at the time the sludge is prepared for sale or give away in a bag
           or other container for application to the land.
           The density of viable helminth ova in the sewage sludge shall be less than one per four grams
           of total solids (dry weight basis) at the time the sewage sludge is used or disposed or at the
           time the sewage sludge is prepared for sale or give away in a bag or other container for
           application to the land.
           Alternative 5 - Sewage sludge shall be treated by one of the Processes to Further Reduce
           Pathogens (PFRP) described in 503 Appendix B. PFRPs include composting, heat drying,
           heat treatment, and thermophilic aerobic digestion.
           Alternative 6 - Sewage sludge shall be treated by a process that is equivalent to a Process to
           Further Reduce Pathogens, if individually approved by the Pathogen Equivalency Committee
           representing the EPA.
       b. Four alternatives are available to demonstrate compliance with Class B sewage sludge.
          Alternatives 2, 3, and 4 are not authorized to demonstrate compliance with Class B sewage
          sludge in Texas permits.
Revised April 2013                            MAJOR                                      Page 17 of PART IV
           Alternative 1 -

              Seven representative samples of the sewage sludge that is disposed shall be collected for
               one monitoring episode at the time the sewage sludge is used or disposed.
              The geometric mean of the density of fecal coliform in the samples collected shall be less
               than either 2,000,000 Most Probable Number per gram of total solids (dry weight basis)
               or 2,000,000 Colony Forming Units per gram of total solids (dry weight basis).
           Alternative 2 - Sewage sludge shall be treated in one of the Processes to significantly Reduce
           Pathogens described in 503 Appendix B.
           Alternative 3 - Sewage sludge shall be treated in a process that is equivalent to a PSRP, if
           individually approved by the Pathogen Equivalency Committee representing the EPA.
           Alternative 4 - Sewage sludge placed on an active surface disposal site is covered with soil or
           other material at the end of each operating day.
   4. Vector Attraction Reduction Requirements
       All sewage sludge that is disposed of in a surface disposal site shall be treated by one of the
       following alternatives 1 through 11 for Vector Attraction Reduction.
       Alternative 1 - The mass of volatile solids in the sewage sludge shall be reduced by a minimum
       of 38%.
       Alternative 2 - If Alternative 1 cannot be met for an anaerobically digested sludge, demonstration
       can be made by digesting a portion of the previously digested sludge anaerobically in the
       laboratory in a bench-scale unit for 40 additional days at a temperature between 30 and 37
       degrees Celsius. Volatile solids must be reduced by less than 17% to demonstrate compliance.
       Alternative 3 - If Alternative 1 cannot be met for an aerobically digested sludge, demonstration
       can be made by digesting a portion of the previously digested sludge with a percent solid of two
       percent or less aerobically in the laboratory in a bench-scale unit for 30 additional days at 20
       degrees Celsius. Volatile solids must be reduced by less than 15% to demonstrate compliance.
       Alternative 4 - The specific oxygen uptake rate (SOUR) for sewage sludge treated in an aerobic
       process shall be equal to or less than 1.5 milligrams of oxygen per hour per gram of total solids
       (dry weight basis) at a temperature of 20 degrees Celsius.
       Alternative 5 - Sewage sludge shall be treated in an aerobic process for 14 days or longer. During
       that time, the temperature of the sewage sludge shall be higher than 40 degrees Celsius and the
       average temperature of the sewage sludge shall be higher than 45 degrees Celsius.
       Alternative 6 - The pH of sewage sludge shall be raised to 12 or higher by alkali addition and,
       without the addition of more alkali shall remain at 12 or higher for two hours and then at 11.5 or
       higher for an additional 22 hours.
       Alternative 7 - The percent solids of sewage sludge that does not contain unstabilized solids
       generated in a primary wastewater treatment process shall be equal to or greater than 75% based
       on the moisture content and total solids prior to mixing with other materials. Unstabilized solids
       are defined as organic materials in sewage sludge that have not been treated in either an aerobic
       or an anaerobic treatment process at the time the sewage sludge is disposed.
Revised April 2013                              MAJOR                                    Page 18 of PART IV
       Alternative 8 - The percent solids of sewage sludge that contains unstabilized solids generated in
       a primary wastewater treatment process shall be equal to or greater than 90% based on the
       moisture content and total solids prior to mixing with other materials. Unstabilized solids are
       defined as organic materials in sewage sludge that have not been treated in either an aerobic or
       an anaerobic treatment process.
       Alternative 9 -

          Sewage sludge shall be injected below the surface of the land.
          No significant amount of the sewage sludge shall be present on the land surface within one
           hour after the sewage sludge is injected.
          When sewage sludge that is injected below the surface of the land is Class A with respect to
           pathogens, the sewage sludge shall be injected below the land surface within eight hours after
           being discharged from the pathogen treatment process.
       Alternative 10 -

          Sewage sludge applied to the land surface or placed on a surface disposal site shall be
           incorporated into the soil within six hours after application to or placement on the land.
          When sewage sludge that is incorporated into the soil is Class A with respect to pathogens,
           the sewage sludge shall be applied to or placed on the land within eight hours after being
           discharged from the pathogen treatment process.
       Alternative 11 - Sewage sludge placed on an active sewage sludge unit shall be covered with soil
       or other material at the end of each operating day.
   5. Methane Gas Control Within a Structure On Site
       When cover is placed on an active surface disposal site, the methane gas concentration in the air
       in any structure shall not exceed 25% of the lower ex plosive limit (LEL) for methane gas during
       the period that the disposal site is active.
   6. Methane Gas Control at Property Line
       The concentration of methane gas in air at the property line of the surface disposal site shall not
       exceed the LEL for methane gas during the period that the disposal site is active.
D. Monitoring Requirements
   Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure (TCLP) Test - Once/Permit Life, performed within one
   year from the effective date of the permit.
   PCBs        - Once/Year
   Methane Gas in covered structures on site - Continuous
   Methane Gas at property line - Continuous
   All other pollutants shall be monitored at the frequency shown below:
    Amount of sewage sludge* (metric tons per   Frequency
    365 day period)
    0 ≤ Sludge < 290                            Once/Year
    290 ≤ Sludge < 1,500                        Once/Quarter
Revised April 2013                                 MAJOR                                        Page 19 of PART IV
   1,500 ≤ Sludge < 15,000                        Once/Two Months
   15,000 ≤ Sludge                                Once/Month
   *Amount of sewage sludge placed on an active sewage sludge unit (dry weight basis).

   Representative samples of sewage sludge shall be collected and analyzed in accordance with the
   methods referenced in 40 CFR 503.8(b).
SECTION II. REQUIREMENTS SPECIFIC TO SURFACE DISPOSAL SITES WITHOUT A LINER
AND LEACHATE COLLECTION SYSTEM.
   1. Pollutant limits - Sewage sludge shall not be applied to a surface disposal site if the
      concentrations of the listed pollutants exceed the corresponding values based on the surface
      disposal site boundary to the property line distance:
       Table 5
       Unit boundary to property line                 Pollutant concentrations* (mg/kg)
       distance (meter)                     Arsenic        Chromium        Nickel       PCB’s
       0 to < 25                              30              200           210          49
       25 to < 50                             34              220           240          49
       50 to < 75                             39              260           270          49
       75 to < 100                            46              300           320          49
       100 to < 125                           53              360           390          49
       125 to < 150                           62              450           420          49
       ≥ 150                                  73              600           420          49
       *Dry weight basis

   2. Management practices - Listed in Section I.B. above.
   3. Notification requirements

       a. The permittee shall assure that the owner of the surface disposal site provide written
          notification to the subsequent site owners that sewage sludge was placed on the land.
       b. The permittee shall provide the location of all existing sludge disposal/use sites to the State
          Historical Commission within 90 days of the effective date of this permit. In addition, the
          permittee shall provide the location of any new disposal/use site to the State Historical
          Commission prior to use of the site.
       c. The permittee shall within 30 days after notification by the State Historical Commission that
          a specific sludge disposal/use area will adversely affect a National Historic Site, cease use of
          such area.

   4. Recordkeeping requirements - The permittee shall develop the following information and shall
      retain the information for five years. The sludge documents will be retained on site at the same
      location as other NPDES records.

       a. The distance of the surface disposal site from the property line and the concentration
          (mg/Kg) in the sludge of each pollutant listed above in Table 5, as well as the applicable
          pollutant concentration criteria listed in Table 5.
       b. A certification statement that all applicable requirements (specifically listed) have been met,
          and that the permittee understands that there are significant penalties for false certification
          including fine and imprisonment. See 503.27(a)(1)(ii) or 503.27(a)(2)(ii) as applicable to the
          permittees sludge disposal activities.
Revised April 2013                           MAJOR                                       Page 20 of PART IV
       c. A description of how either the Class A or Class B pathogen reduction requirements are met,
          or whether sewage sludge placed on a surface disposal site is covered with soil or other
          material at the end of each operating day.
       d. A description of how the vector attraction reduction requirements are met.
       e. Results of a groundwater monitoring program developed by a qualified ground-water
          scientist, or a certification by a qualified groundwater scientist may be used to demonstrate
          that sewage sludge placed on an active sewage sludge unit does not contaminate an aquifer.
          A qualified ground water scientist is an individual with a baccalaureate or post graduate
          degree in the natural sciences or engineering who has sufficient training and experience in
          groundwater hydrology and related fields, as may be demonstrated by State registration,
          professional certification or completion of accredited university programs, to make sound
          professional judgments regarding groundwater monitoring, pollutant fate and transport, and
          corrective action.

   5. Reporting Requirements - The permittee shall report annually on the DMR the following
      information:

       a. Report No for no liner and leachate collection system at surface disposal site.
       b. The frequency of monitoring listed in Element II, Section I.D. which applies to the permittee.
       c. Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure (TCLP) results (Pass/Fail).
       d. The concentration (mg/K g) in the sludge of each pollutant listed in Table 5 as well as the
          applicable pollutant concentration criteria listed in Table 5.
       e. The concentration (mg/Kg) of PCB's in the sludge.
       f. The distance between the property line and the surface disposal site boundary.
       g. Level of pathogen reduction achieved (C lass A or Class B), unless Vector attraction
          reduction alternative no. 11 is utilized.
       h. List Alternative used as listed in Section I.C.3.(a. or b.). Alternatives describe how the
          pathogen reduction requirements are met.
       i. Vector attraction reduction Alternative used as listed in Section I.C.4.
       j. Annual sludge production in dry metric tons/year.
       k. Amount of sludge surface disposed in dry metric tons/year.
       l. Amount of sludge transported interstate in dry metric tons/year.
       m. A narrative description explaining how the management practices in §503.24 are met shall be
          attached to the DMR.
       n. The certification statement listed in 503.27(a)(1)(ii) or 503.27(a)(2)(ii) as applicable to the
          permittees sludge disposal activities, shall be attached to the DMR.
SECTION III. REQUIREMENTS SPECIFIC TO SURFACE DISPOSAL SITES WITH A LINER AND
LEACHATE COLLECTION SYSTEM.
   1. Pollutant limits - None.
   2. Management Practices - Listed in Section I.B. above.
   3. Notification requirements

       a. The permittee shall assure that the owner of the surface disposal site provide written
          notification to the subsequent owner of the site that sewage sludge was placed on the land.
       b. The permittee shall provide the location of all existing sludge disposal/use sites to the State
          Historical Commission within 90 days of the effective date of this permit. In addition, the
          permittee shall provide the location of any new disposal/use site to the State Historical
          Commission prior to use of the site. The permittee shall within 30 days after notification by
Revised April 2013                            MAJOR                                      Page 21 of PART IV
            the State Historical Commission that a specific sludge disposal/use area will adversely affect
            a National Historic Site, cease use of such area.

   4. Recordkeeping requirements - The permittee shall develop the following information and shall
      retain the information for five years. The sludge documents will be retained on site at the same
      location as other NPDES records.

       a. The following certification statement found in 503.27(a)(1)(ii):

            "I certify, under penalty of law, that the pathogen requirements (define option used) and the
            vector attraction reduction requirements in (define option used) have been met. This
            determination has been made under my direction and supervision in accordance with the
            system designed to ensure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
            information used to determine the (pathogen requirements and vector attraction reduction
            requirements, if appropriate) have been met. I am aware that there are significant penalties
            for false certification including the possibility of fine and imprisonment.”

       b. A description of how either the Class A or Class B pathogen reduction requirements are met
          or whether sewage sludge placed on a surface disposal site is covered with soil or other
          material at the end of each operating day.
       c. A description of how the vector attraction reduction requirements are met.
       d. Results of a ground-water monitoring program developed by a qualified ground-water
          scientist, or a certification by a qualified ground-water scientist may be used to demonstrate
          that sewage sludge placed on an active sewage sludge unit does not contaminate an aquifer.

   5. Reporting Requirements - The permittee shall report annually on the DMR the following
      information:

       a.   Report YES for liner and leachate collection system at surface disposal site.
       b.   The frequency of monitoring listed in Element 2, Section I.D. which applies to the permittee.
       c.   Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure (TCLP) results (Pass/Fail).
       d.   The concentration (mg/Kg ) in the sludge of PCBs.
       e.   Level of pathogen reduction achieved (C lass A or Class B), unless Vector attraction
            reduction alternative no. 11 is used.
       f.   List Alternative used as listed in Section I.C.3.(a. or b.). Alternatives describe how the
            pathogen reduction requirements are met.
       g.   Vector attraction reduction Alternative used as listed in Section I.B.4. h.
       h.   Annual sludge production in dry metric tons/year.
       i.   Amount of sludge surface disposed in dry metric tons/year.
       j.   Amount of sludge transported interstate in dry metric tons/year.
       k.   A narrative description explaining how the management practices in §503.24 are met shall be
            attached to the DMR.
       l.   A certification statement that all applicable requirements (specifically listed) have been met,
            and that the permittee understands that there are significant penalties for false certification
            including fine and imprisonment (See 503.27(a)(1)(ii) or 503.27(a)(2)(ii) whichever applies
            to the permittees sludge disposal activities) shall be attached to the DMR.
Revised April 2013                           MAJOR                                      Page 22 of PART IV
               ELEMENT 3 - MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE LANDFILL DISPOSAL
SECTION I. REQUIREMENTS APPLYING TO ALL SEWAGE SLUDGE DISPOSED IN A
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE LANDFILL
   1. The permittee shall handle and dispose of sewage sludge in accordance with Section 405 of the
      Clean Water Act and all other applicable Federal regulations to protect public health and the
      environment from any reasonably anticipated adverse effects due to any toxic pollutants that may
      be present. The permittee shall ensure that the sewage sludge meets the requirements in 40 CFR
      258 concerning the quality of the sludge dispose d in a municipal solid waste landfill unit.
   2. If requirements for sludge management practices or pollutant criteria become more stringent than
      the sludge pollutant limits or acceptable management practices in this permit, or control a
      pollutant not listed in this permit, this permit may be modified or revoked and reissued to
      conform to the requirements promulgated at Section 405(d)(2) of the Clean Water Act.
   3. If the permittee generates sewage sludge and supplies that sewage sludge to the owner or
      operator of a MSWLF for disposal, the permittee shall provide to the owner or operator of the
      MSWLF appropriate information needed to be in compliance with the provisions of this permit.
   4. The permittee shall give prior notice to EPA (Chief, Permits Branch, Water Management
      Division, Mail Code 6WQ-P, EPA Region 6, 1445 Ross Avenue, Dallas, Texas 75202) of any
      planned changes in the sewage sludge disposal practice, in accordance with 40 CFR Part
      122.41(l)(1)(iii). These changes may justify the application of permit conditions that are different
      from or absent in the existing permit. Change in the sludge use or disposal practice may because
      for modification of the permit in accordance with 40 CFR Part 122.62(a)(1).
   5. The permittee shall provide the location of all existing sludge disposal/use sites to the State
      Historical Commission within 90 days of the effective date of this permit. In addition, the
      permittee shall provide the location of any new disposal/use site to the State Historical
      Commission prior to use of the site. The permittee shall within 30 days after notification by the
      State Historical Commission that a specific sludge disposal/use area will adversely affect a
      National Historic Site, cease use of such area.
   6. Sewage sludge shall be tested once during the life of the permit within one year from the
      effective date of the permit in accordance with the method specified at 40 CFR 268, Appendix I
      (Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure (TCLP)) or other approved methods. Sludge shall
      be tested after final treatment prior to leaving the POTW site. Sewage sludge determined to be a
      hazardous waste in accordance with 40 CFR Part 261, shall be handled according to RCRA
      standards for the disposal of hazardous waste in accordance with 40 CFR Part 262. The disposal
      of sewage sludge determined to be a hazardous waste, in other than a certified hazardous waste
      disposal facility shall be prohibited. The Information Management Section, telephone no. (214)
      665-6750, and the appropriate state agency shall be notified of test failure within 24 hours. A
      written report shall be provided to this office within 7 days after failing the TCLP. The report
      will contain test results, certification that unauthorized disposal has not occurred and a summary
      of alternative disposal plans that comply with RCRA standards for the disposal of hazardous
      waste. The report shall be addressed to: Director, Multimedia Planning and Permitting Division,
      EPA Region 6, Mail Code 6PD, 144 5 Ross Avenue, Dallas, Texas 75202. A copy of this report
      shall be sent to the Chief, Water Enforcement Branch, Compliance Assurance and Enforcement
      Division, Mail Code 6EN-W, at the same street address.
   7. Sewage sludge shall be tested as needed, or at a minimum, once/year in accordance with the
      method 9095 (Paint Filter Liquids Test) as described in "Test Methods for Evaluating Solid
      Wastes, Physical/Chemical Methods" (EPA Pub. No. SW-846).
   8. Recordkeeping requirements - The permittee shall develop the following information and shall
      retain the information for five years.
Revised April 2013                           MAJOR                                      Page 23 of PART IV
       a. The description, including procedures followed, and results of the Paint Filter Tests
          performed.
       b. The description, including procedures followed, and results of the TCLP Test.

   9. Reporting requirements - The permittee shall report annually on the Discharge Monitoring
      Report the following information:

       a. Results of the Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure Test conducted on the sludge to be
          disposed (Pass/Fail).
       b. Annual sludge production in dry metric tons/year.
       c. Amount of sludge disposed in a municipal solid waste landfill in dry metric tons/year.
       d. Amount of sludge transported interstate in dry metric tons/year.
       e. A certification that sewage sludge meets the requirements in 40 CFR 258 concerning the
          quality of the sludge disposed in a municipal solid waste landfill unit shall be attached to the
          DMR.
