                           NPDES PERMIT NO. NM0000116
                                  FACT SHEET
FOR THE DRAFT NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM
(NPDES) PERMIT TO DISCHARGE TO WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES

APPLICANT

GCC Rio Grande, Inc.
P.O. Box 100
Tijeras, NM 87059

ISSUING OFFICE

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Region 6
1201 Elm Street, Suite 500
Dallas, Texas 75270

PREPARED BY

Nichole Young
Environmental Scientist
Permitting Section (6WDPE)
Water Division
VOICE: 214-665-6447
EMAIL: young.nichole@epa.gov

DATE PREPARED

March 15, 2021

PERMIT ACTION

Proposed revocation and reissuance of the current permit issued with an effective date of June 1,
2016, and an expiration date of May 31, 2021.

RECEIVING WATER – BASIN

Corral Canyon, thence to Tijeras Canyon, thence to Rio Grande– Rio Grande Basin
       PERMIT NO. NM0000116                   FACT SHEET                       Page 2 of 11


DOCUMENT ABBREVIATIONS

In the document that follows, various abbreviations are used. They are as follows:

4Q3        Lowest four-day average flow rate expected to occur once every three-years
BAT        Best available technology economically achievable
BCT        Best conventional pollutant control technology
BPT        Best practicable control technology currently available
BMP        Best management plan
BOD        Biochemical oxygen demand (five-day unless noted otherwise)
BPJ        Best professional judgment
CBOD       Carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand (five-day unless noted otherwise)
CD         Critical dilution
CFR        Code of Federal Regulations
cfs        Cubic feet per second
COD        Chemical oxygen demand
COE        United States Corp of Engineers
CWA        Clean Water Act
DMR        Discharge monitoring report
ELG        Effluent limitation guidelines
EPA        United States Environmental Protection Agency
ESA        Endangered Species Act
FCB        Fecal coliform bacteria
F&WS       United States Fish and Wildlife Service
mg/l       Milligrams per liter (one part per million)
ug/l       Micrograms per litter (one part per billion)
MGD        Million gallons per day
NMAC       New Mexico Administrative Code
NMED       New Mexico Environment Department
NMIP       New Mexico NPDES Permit Implementation Procedures
NMWQS      New Mexico State Standards for Interstate and Intrastate Surface Waters
NPDES      National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
MQL        Minimum quantification level
O&G        Oil and grease
POTW       Publicly owned treatment works
RP         Reasonable potential
SIC        Standard industrial classification
s.u.       Standard units (for parameter pH)
SWQB       Surface Water Quality Bureau
TDS        Total dissolved solids
TMDL       Total maximum daily load
TRC        Total residual chlorine
TSS        Total suspended solids
UAA        Use attainability analysis
USFWS      United States Fish & Wildlife Service
USGS       United States Geological Service
WLA        Wasteload allocation
WET        Whole effluent toxicity
WQCC       New Mexico Water Quality Control Commission
WQMP       Water Quality Management Plan
WWTP       Wastewater treatment plant
       PERMIT NO. NM0000116                    FACT SHEET                       Page 3 of 11


I.     CHANGES FROM THE PREVIOUS PERMIT

Changes from the permit previously issued April 8, 2016, with an effective date of June 1, 2016,
and an expiration date of May 31, 2021, are:

       A. SSM language has been included.
       B. Electronic reporting language has been included.
       C. Outfall 004 and all associated requirements and limits have been removed at the
          request of the permittee. Outfall was never constructed.
       D. 30 day average limit for aluminum and copper have been included.
       E. Cadmium monitoring and reporting requirements have been included.

II.    APPLICANT LOCATION and ACTIVITY

The plant site is located at 11783 State Highway 337, in Bernalillo County, New Mexico, about
10 miles east of Albuquerque. Under Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code(s) 3241, the
applicant currently manufactures Portland cement. The production processes include
procurement of raw materials, raw milling, kilns, clinker cooling/storage, product finishing,
product storage and load out. Outfall(s) are listed
below:

Outfall 001: Latitude: 35° 04' 25", Longitude: 106° 23' 51"

III.   EFFLUENT CHARACTERISTICS

The Southwestern U.S., including New Mexico continues to be a in a period of extended
drought. The most recent sampling event occurred in September of 2015 and prior to that event,
two discharge events were sampled in July 2015. Because of limited data and to comply with
anti-backsliding laws, the current permit establishes monitoring requirements for several metals
based on data submitted in 2015. In addition, because discharge is very infrequent, with the last
discharge occuring more than five years ago, it is impossible to have the permittee submit data
satisfying SSM because of the inability to obtain a sample to analyze. Copper is reported as total
metals. The geometric means, analytical results, expressed in µg/l , of analytical results are listed
below:

        Parameter                 Max      Avg
                                  (mg/l unless noted)
 Flow (MGD)                       0.012    N/A
 pH, minimum, standard units (su) 7.9      N/A
 pH, maximum, standard units (su) 8.6      N/A
 TSS                              62.33    N/A
 BOD                              2.0      N/A
 Cadmium*1                        0.002    N/A
 Copper                           0.006    N/A
 Lead                             ND       N/A
 Mercury *2                       0.0002 N/A
       PERMIT NO. NM0000116                   FACT SHEET                       Page 4 of 11


Nickel *3                             0.010     N/A
Selenium                              ND        N/A
Silver*4                              0.005     N/A
Thallium                              ND        N/A
Zinc                                  ND        N/A
Phosphorous                           0.067     N/A
Sulfate                               81.00     N/A
Aluminum, total                       2.87      N/A
Barium, total                         0.083     N/A
Boron, total                          ND        N/A
Cobalt, total                         ND        N/A
Iron, total                           70.0      N/A
Magnesium, total                      5.33      N/A
Molybdenum, total                     0.015     N/A
Manganese, total                      0.014     N/A

*1 Reported as ND, however detection limit used 0.002 mg/l doesn’t meet MQL of 1 ug/l.
Therefore the detection limit was used as value.
* 2 Reported as ND, however the detection limit used 0.0002 mg/l doesn’t meet the MQL of
0.0005 ug/l. Therefore the detection limit was used as value.
*3 Reported as ND, however the detection limit used 0.010 mg/l doesn’t meet the MQL of 0.5
ug/l. Therefore the detection limit was used as value.
*4 Reported as ND, however the detection limit used 0.0050 mg/l doesn’t meet the MQL of 0.5
ug/l. Therefore the detection limit was used as value .

IV.    REGULATORY AUTHORITY/PERMIT ACTION

In November 1972, Congress passed the Federal Water Pollution Control Act establishing the
NPDES permit program to control water pollution. These amendments established technology-
based or end-of-pipe control mechanisms and an interim goal to achieve “water quality which
provides for the protection and propagation of fish, shellfish, and wildlife and provides for
recreation in and on the water,” more commonly known as the “swimmable, fishable” goal.
Further amendments in 1977 of the CWA gave EPA the authority to implement pollution control
programs, such as setting wastewater standards for industry, and established the basic structure
for regulating pollutants discharges into the waters of the United States. In addition, it made it
unlawful for any person to discharge any pollutant from a point source into navigable waters,
unless a permit was obtained under its’ provisions. Regulations governing the EPA administered
NPDES permit program are generally found at 40 CFR §122 (program requirements & permit
conditions), §124 (procedures for decision making), §125 (technology-based standards) and §136
(analytical procedures). Other parts of 40 CFR provide guidance for specific activities and may
be used in this document as required.

The permittee’s requests are discussed below. It is proposed that the permit be reissued for a 5-
year term following regulations promulgated at 40 CFR §122.46(a).

V.     DRAFT PERMIT RATIONALE AND PROPOSED PERMIT CONDITIONS
       PERMIT NO. NM0000116                   FACT SHEET                      Page 5 of 11



   A. OVERVIEW OF TECHNOLOGY-BASED VERSUS WATER QUALITY
   STANDARDS-BASED EFFLUENT LIMITATIONS AND CONDITIONS

Regulations contained in 40 CFR §122.44 requires that NPDES permit limits are developed that
meet the more stringent of either technology-based effluent limitation guidelines, numerical
and/or narrative water quality standard-based effluent limits, or the previous permit.

   B. TECHNOLOGY-BASED EFFLUENT LIMITATIONS/CONDITIONS

Regulations promulgated at 40 CFR §122.44 (a) require technology-based effluent limitations to
be placed in NPDES permits based on ELGs where applicable, on BPJ in the absence of
guidelines, or on a combination of the two. In the absence of promulgated guidelines for the
discharge, permit conditions may be established using BPJ procedures. EPA establishes
limitations based on the following technology-based controls: BPT, BCT, and BAT. These
levels of treatment are:

BPT - The first level of technology-based standards generally based on the average of the best
existing performance facilities within an industrial category or subcategory.

BCT - Technology-based standards for conventional pollutants.

BAT - The most appropriate means available on a national basis for controlling the direct
discharge of toxic and non-conventional pollutants to navigable waters. BAT effluent limits
represent the best existing performance of treatment technologies that are economically
achievable within an industrial point source category or subcategory.

Regulations found in 40 CFR 411.13 and 411.17 define BAT and BCT effluent limitations,
respectively, for cement manufacturing non-leaching process, and 40 CFR 411.37 defines BCT
effluent guidelines for materials storage piles runoff from cement manufacturing facilities.
Effluent limitations established at Outfall 001 in the current permit regulate overflows from
Quarry #1 pond which stores storm runoff and process water effluent from plant areas. The 40
CFR 411.37 ELG of 50 mg/l was the basis for establishment of TSS effluent limitation at Outfall
001. EPA did not establish 40 CFR 411.13 temperature limitation at Outfall 001 because
discharges at Outfall 001 would be intermittent and the permit restricted discharges due to
catastrophic or chronic precipitation events. The 40 CFR 411.17 TSS mass load limitation might
not be applicable at Outfall 001 because the combination of storm runoff and process water. TSS
reported maximum daily discharge did exceed the daily max limit of 50 mg/l. As a result, it is
proposed in the draft permit that the permittee report 30-day average for TSS.

   C. WATER QUALITY BASED LIMITATIONS

       1. General Comments

Water quality-based requirements are necessary where effluent limits more stringent than
technology-based limits are necessary to maintain or achieve federal or state water quality limits.
       PERMIT NO. NM0000116                   FACT SHEET                       Page 6 of 11


Under Section 301(b)(1)(C) of the CWA, discharges are subject to effluent limitations based on
federal or state WQS. Effluent limitations and/or conditions established in the draft permit are in
compliance with applicable State WQS and applicable State water quality management plans to
assure that surface WQS of the receiving waters are protected and maintained or attained.

       2. Implementation

The NPDES permits contain technology-based effluent limitations reflecting the best controls
available. Where these technology-based permit limits do not protect water quality or the
designated uses, additional water quality-based effluent limitations and/or conditions are
included in the NPDES permits. State narrative and numerical water quality standards are used
in conjunction with EPA criteria and other available toxicity information to determine the
adequacy of technology-based permit limits and the need for additional water quality-based
controls.

       3. State Water Quality Standards

The general and specific stream standards are provided in NMWQS (20.6.4 NMAC amended
through July 24, 2020). The facility discharges into Corral Canyon, thence into Tijeras Canyon
in segment number 20.6.4.105 of the Rio Grande Basin. The designated uses for intermittent
stream, designated as segment number 20.6.4.98, are wildlife habitat, livestock watering,
marginal warmwater aquatic life, and primary contact. EPA was unable to approve section
20.6.4.98 of the NMWQS because the State did not submit a Use Attainable Assessment (UAA)
to support an aquatic life designation that does not meet the CWA §101(a)(2) objective as
required by 40 CFR 131.10(j)(1). The CWA sections 101(a)(2) and 303(c) require water quality
standards to provide, wherever attainable, water quality for the protection and propagation of
fish, shellfish, wildlife, and recreation in and on the water, functions commonly referred to as
“fishable/swimmable” uses. EPA's current water quality regulation effectively establishes a
rebuttable presumption that “fishable/swimmable” uses are attainable and therefore should apply
to a water body unless it can be demonstrated that such uses are not attainable. Prior to submittal
of UAA, the designated uses of the downstream perennial stream are applicable to the receiving
water. Therefore, chronic aquatic life criteria are appropriate for RP screening.

The permittee is encouraged to contact NMED on conducting a UAA study.

       4. Permit Action - Water Quality-Based Limits

Regulations promulgated at 40 CFR §122.44(d) require limits in addition to, or more stringent
than effluent limitation guidelines (technology based). State WQS that are more stringent than
effluent limitation guidelines are as follows:

           a. TOXICS

The previous permit established limits for total aluminum and total copper. These limits will be
maintained. In accordance with 40 CFR 122.45(c), total recoverable metal concentration must be
established as effluent limitations. The exceptions listed in that sub-section refers to technology-
       PERMIT NO. NM0000116                    FACT SHEET                       Page 7 of 11


based, not WQ-based, criteria. The permittee must report total or total recoverable metal
concentrations for compliance purpose. Because State WQS for aluminum and copper were
dissolved-based criteria, the linear partition coefficient for copper to convert dissolved copper
concentration to total concentration is used to calculate the maximum daily effluent limitation.
However, because a partition coefficient for aluminum is not available, the effluent limitation for
total aluminum is based on the dissolved criteria. Three samples with hardness data were
submitted and the average of these samples 187 mg/L was used for RP screening purposes. The
permit proposes to continue to include monitoring for hardness (CaCO3) for later RP analysis.

               1. Aluminum

Aluminum did show RP, however because the prescribed daily and 30 day average limit
concentration (3.2 mg/l) is less stringent than the limit in the previous permit, the previous limit
will be maintained at the request of NMED and to comply with antibacksliding requirements.
Permit limit of 0.75 mg/l daily max was previously established for aluminum based on water
quality standards. It is proposed that the permit limit of 0.75 mg/l be applied to the 30 day
average. Because aluminum exhibited RP, daily and 30 day loadings of 0.78 lbs/day will be
established in the draft permit.

               2. Copper

Copper did not show RP, however permit limit of .0011 mg/l daily max was previously
established for copper based on water quality standards and will be maintained in the draft
permit. It is proposed that this limit be applied to the 30 day average as well. Because data is
limited and discharge is infrequent, dissolved copper monitoring requirements will be maintained
inthe draft permit.

               3. Cadmium

The permittee reported a non-detect result for Cadmium, however the testing submitted by the
permittee did not satisfy SSM. As previously described the permittee has not discharged in over
five years and is unable to obtain a sample to analyze at the appropriate detection level. As a
result, the detection limit used by the permittee .002 mg/l was used as the effluent concentration
value in RP analysis. Using this value, cadmium showed RP and as a result limits were
suggested. Only one sample result was provided as a result of a drought. Because data is limited
and based on presumptive values, Cadmium monitoring and reporting requirements will be
added to the draft permit to obtain more current data for later RP analysis. Limits will not be
prescribed.

                   b. Oil & Grease

Effluent data demonstrated that the discharge has no RP to contribute to or cause exceedance of
current effluent limitation. Also, the operation has no RP to generate oil & grease. EPA
proposes to continue to maintain the oil and grease narrative “no visible sheen” limitation.

   D. MONITORING FREQUENCY FOR LIMITED PARAMETERS
        PERMIT NO. NM0000116                  FACT SHEET                       Page 8 of 11



Regulations require permits to establish monitoring requirements to yield data representative of
the monitored activity, 40 CFR §122.48(b), and to assure compliance with permit limitations, 40
CFR §122.44(i)(1). Sample frequency is based on the March, 2012, NMIP. Based on the
discharge frequency of the facility, the NMIP requires that pH has daily monitoring frequency
and all other limited parameters have weekly monitoring frequency requirements. Flow is
proposed to be monitored daily by estimate. Grab sample type is proposed because a discharge
would be the overflow from a retention pond.

      E. WHOLE EFFLUENT TOXICITY LIMITATIONS

Procedures for implementing WET terms and conditions in NPDES permits are contained in the
NMIP, March 2012. Table 11 of Section V of the NMIP outlines the type of WET testing for
different types of discharges. The 48-hour WET testing for toxicity will be maintained for the
proposed permit term. The frequency is 1/year. The CD of the discharge was previously
determined to be 100%. The test species shall be Daphnia pulex.

During the period, beginning at the effective date of the permit and lasting through the expiration
date of the permit, the permittee is authorized to discharge from Outfall 001 to the Corral
Canyon. WET testing is established at Outfall 001. Because there was no data to analyze WET
RP therefore conditions from the last permit will be carried over. WET will be performed at first
discharge. A grab sample type is established because if a discharge occurs, it comes from a
retention pond which provides a relative similarity of effluent characteristics and EPA does not
expect such a discharge will last long.

VI.     FACILITY OPERATIONAL PRACTICES

      A. BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES

        1. The operator shall take reasonable steps to maintain maximum capacities of retention
        ponds to contain the process wastewaters and storm water runoffs from manufacturing
        areas.

        2. Discharges are restricted to overflows from the retention pond due to catastrophic or
        chronic precipitation events.

        3. Discharges of storm water runoff from access roads in undisturbed areas shall be
        covered under the NPDES Multi-Sector Storm Water Permit.

        4. If a discharge of storm runoffs from mining areas is necessary, the discharge must
        comply with effluent limitations established at Outfall 001.

      B. OPERATION AND REPORTING

The applicant is required to operate the treatment facility at maximum efficiency at all times; to
monitor the facility’s discharge on a regular basis; and report the results quarterly. The
        PERMIT NO. NM0000116                   FACT SHEET                      Page 9 of 11


monitoring results will be available to the public.

Electronic Reporting Rule

The EPA published the electronic reporting rule in the federal register (80 FR 64063) on October
22, 2015. The rule became effective on December 21, 2015. One year after the effective date of
the final rule, NPDES regulated entities that are required to submit DMRs (including majors and
non-majors, individually permitted facilities and facilities covered by general permits) must do
so electronically. All DMRs shall be electronically reported effective December 21, 2016, per 40
CFR 127.16. If you are submitting on paper before December 21, 2016, you must report on the
Discharge Monitoring Report (DMR) Form EPA. No. 3320-1 in accordance with the "General
Instructions" provided on the form. No additional copies are needed if reporting electronically,
however when submitting paper form EPA No. 3320-1, the permittee shall submit the original
DMR signed and certified as required by Part III.D.11 and all other reports required by Part
III.D. to the EPA and other agencies as required. (See Part III.D.IV of the permit.). To submit
electronically, access the NetDMR website at www.epa.gov/netdmr and contact the
R6NetDMR@epa.gov in-box for further instructions. PA and authorized NPDES programs will
begin electronically receiving these DMRs from all DMR filers and start sharing these data with
each other.

Sufficiently Sensitive Analytical Methods (SSM)

The permittee must use sufficiently sensitive EPA-approved analytical methods (SSM) (under 40
CFR part 136 or required under 40 CFR chapter I, subchapters N or O) when quantifying the
presence of pollutants in a discharge for analyses of pollutants or pollutant parameters under the
permit. In case the approved methods are not sufficiently sensitive to the limits, the most SSM
with the lowest method detection limit (MDL) must be used as defined under 40 CFR
122.44(i)(1)(iv)(A). If no analytical laboratory is able to perform a test satisfying the SSM in the
region, the most SSM with the lowest MDL must be used after adequate demonstrations by the
permittee and EPA approval.

VII.    303(d) LIST

The Tijeras Arroyo (Canyon), a tributary to Rio Grande, is listed as being impaired for benthic-
macroinvertebrate bioassessment and nutrient/eutrophication biological indicators and the
probable cause include channelization, drought-related impacts, on site treatment systems,
rangeland grazing, wastes from pets and unknown sources. EPA does not consider that the
discharger is a probable contributor to the impairment because of the nature of operation and the
frequency of discharges. No additional pollutants are established to address the stream
impairment. A reopener language in the permit allows additional permit conditions if warranted
by future changes and/or new TMDLs.

VIII.   ANTIDEGRADATION

The NMAC, Section 20.6.4.8 “Antidegradation Policy and Implementation Plan” sets forth the
requirements to protect designated uses through implementation of the State water quality
standards. The limitations and monitoring requirements set forth in the proposed permit are
       PERMIT NO. NM0000116                   FACT SHEET                      Page 10 of 11


developed from the State water quality standards and are protective of those designated uses.
Furthermore, the policy sets forth the intent to protect the existing quality of those waters, whose
quality exceeds their designated use. The permit requirements and the limits are protective of the
assimilative capacity of the receiving waters, which is protective of the designated uses of that
water, NMAC Section 20.6.4.8.A.2.

IX.    ANTIBACKSLIDING

The proposed permit is consistent with the requirements to meet antibacksliding provisions of the
Clean Water Act, Section 402(o) and 40 CFR §122.44(l)(i)(A), which state in part that interim
or final effluent limitations must be as stringent as those in the previous permit, unless material
and substantial alterations or additions to the permitted facility occurred after permit issuance
which justify the application of a less stringent effluent limitation. Previous permit limits have
been maintained in the permit, in addition, additional limits and monitoring has been required.

X.     ENDANGERED SPECIES CONSIDERATIONS

According to the most recent county listing available at US Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS),
Southwest Region 2 website, http://ecos.fws.gov/ipac/wizard/chooseLocation!prepare.action,
five species in Bernalillo County are listed as endangered or threatened. The New Mexico
meadow jumping mouse (Mustela nigripesZapus hudsonius luteus), Rio Grande silvery minnow
(Hybognathus amarus), and the Southwestern willow flycatcher (Empidonax traillii extimus) are
listed as endangered. The Mexican spotted owl (Strix occidentalis lucida) and the Yellow-billed
Cuckoo (Coccyzus americanus) are listed as threatened. The American bald eagle (Haliaeetus
leucocephalus) was previously listed as endangered. The USFWS removed the American bald
eagle in the lower 48 states from the Federal List of Endangered and Threatened Wildlife Federal
Register, July 9, 2007, (Volume 72, Number 130).

EPA evaluated the effects of listed species by reviewing a report titled “Threatened and
Endangered Species Survey of Kirtland Air Force Base (KAFB), New Mexico” dated April
1995, when EPA issued the permit to the GCC Rio Grande in 2000. Mexican spotted owl and
southwestern willow flycatcher were not observed in the area and the discharge would be much
diluted by runoff if it ever reaches Rio Grande to cause any effect on Rio Grande silvery
minnow. In addition, USFWS defines the site as not having any critical habitat for any of the
aforementioned endangered and threatened species. Therefore, EPA has determined that this
reissuance of this permit will have “no effect” on listed threatened and endangered species nor
will it adversely modify designated critical habitat.

XI. HISTORICAL and ARCHEOLOGICAL PRESERVATION CONSIDERATIONS

The reissuance of the permit should have no impact on historical and/or archeological sites as no
construction activities are planned.

XII.   PERMIT REOPENER

The permit may be reopened and modified during the life of the permit if State Water Quality
        PERMIT NO. NM0000116                  FACT SHEET                     Page 11 of 11


Standards are promulgated or revised. In addition, if the State establishes a TMDL, this permit
may be reopened to establish effluent limitations for the parameter(s) to be consistent with that
TMDL. Modification of the permit is subject to the provisions of 40 CFR §124.5.

XIII.   VARIANCE REQUESTS

No variance requests have been received.

XIV. CERTIFICATION
The permit is in the process of certification by the State Agency following regulations
promulgated at 40 CFR 124.53. A draft permit and draft public notice will be sent to the District
Engineer, Corps of Engineers; to the Regional Director of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and
to the National Marine Fisheries Service prior to the publication of that notice.

XV.     FINAL DETERMINATION

The public notice describes the procedures for the formulation of final determinations.

XVI. ADMINISTRATIVE RECORD

The following information was used to develop the proposed permit:

   A. APPLICATION(s)

        EPA Application Form 2A received December 2, 2020

   B. 40 CFR CITATIONS

        Citations to 40 CFR are as of January 7, 2021

   C. Endangered Species References

        http://ecos.fws.gov/ipac/wizard/chooseLocation!prepare.action

   D. STATE OF NEW MEXICO REFERENCES

        New Mexico State Standards for Interstate and Intrastate Surface Water, 20.6.4 NMAC,
        July 24, 2020.

        Procedures for Implementing National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permits
        in New Mexico, March 2012.

        State of New Mexico 303(d) List for Assessed Stream and River Reaches, 2018-2020.
